Hey econ students, this is Jacob Clifford.
I made this video for one reason: to save
you time in an economics class. Your
teacher or professors can expect you to be able
to use supply and demand — not just know
supply and demand. So I made this video
to bridge that gap between introduction
and application as fast as possible.
Now do me a favor — don't take any notes
as you watch this video the first time
through. Just understand the concepts, and
then later if you need to, come back and
take notes. So here we go — everything you
need to know about supply and demand in
less than eight minutes. Okay, let's start
off with demand. This is a demand curve
and it shows the inverse relationship
between price and the quantity that
consumers are willing and able to buy. So
the quantity demanded — when the price
goes up, the quantity demanded falls, and the
price goes down, the quantity demanded
increases and people want to buy more.
There are three reasons for the law of demand.
The first one is the substitution effect.
When the price goes up for ice cream,
people substitute away from ice cream
and go buy other products like candy bars.
And if the price falls for ice cream,
people substitute away from candy bars
and start buying more ice cream. The
second reason is the income effect. When
the price goes up for ice cream, people
are going to buy less ice cream because
they have less purchasing power. They can
buy less ice cream. And when the price
falls for ice cream, the quantity demanded is
going to increase because people can buy
more ice cream — each dollar buys more ice
cream than before. The third reason is
the law of diminishing marginal utility.
As you consume more and more ice cream,
you get less and less additional
satisfaction or happiness from it. So the
price has to fall to increase the
quantity that people are going to buy. So
if you already bought one ice cream cone,
to get you to buy another one they've
got to lower the price. That shows you an
inverse relationship between price and
quantity — the law of demand. Now
notice: when there's a change in the
price, that moves along the demand curve.
But what if something else changes that
causes the demand curve to shift? There are
five shifters or determinants of demand
that cause the demand curve to increase
and shift to the right, or decrease and
shift to the left. The first one is taste
and preferences. For example, if it's 100
degrees outside, then the demand for ice
cream would shift to the right. But
notice we're not talking about a change
in the price of ice cream. The price is
staying the same. It's some other factor
that's causing demand to go up — people
are buying more because it's a hot day
outside. And if it was a cold day outside,
at every single price people would buy
less because they don't want to buy ice
cream because it's freezing. The second shifter is
more consumers — more consumers would
increase demand, less consumers or fewer
buyers would decrease demand. The third
shifter is the price of substitutes and
complements. Notice this is not the price
of ice cream — this is the price of some
other good, like candy bars. Candy bar is
an ice cream substitute. So if the
price goes up for candy bars, people can
buy more ice cream and the demand curve
is going to shift to the right. But ice
cream and ice cream cones are not
substitutes — they're complements. So if
the price goes up for cones, that's going
to cause the demand to go down for ice
cream. Again, we're talking about the
price changing, but not the price of ice
cream — the price of some different
product that's related to ice cream. The
next shifter is income, and it depends on
the type of product because there are
normal goods and inferior goods. A
normal good is when income goes up,
people buy more of it. When income goes
down, people buy less of it. But an inferior
good is when income goes up, people
actually buy less of that product, and
when income goes down, people would buy
more. Ice cream is probably a normal good,
but Top Ramen is an example of an
inferior good — when incomes go down,
people actually end up buying more of it.
The fifth and final shifter of demand is
a change in expectations. So if you
expect prices to go up in the future,
maybe the demand will increase now. So
there we go — those are the five shifters
of demand. And notice the price of ice cream
is not on that list. Price moves along
the curve — these shift the curve. Okay,
let's keep going. Now let's switch over to supply.
This is a supply curve. It shows a positive
relationship between price and the
quantity supplied. The reason for this
has to do with making profit. If the
price is low for ice cream, producers
don't want to produce very much because
they're not going to make very much
money. If the price goes up, they're going
to want to produce a whole lot more
because they're going to make more
profit. So again, a change in the price of
ice cream moves along the supply curve.
But there are also five shifters of supply.
The first one is a change in the price
of resources or inputs to produce ice
cream. For example, the price of milk goes
up — that's going to cause the supply to
decrease. Now notice here a decrease in
supply is a shift to the left. So just
like demand, an increase is to the right,
a decrease is to the left. Now if the price were
to fall for some resource of producing
ice cream, then the supply would shift to
the right and that would be an increase.
The second shifter of supply is a change
in technology. So if there's a new
machine that produces ice cream faster
and cheaper, that would cause the supply
curve to shift to the right. The third
shifter is some sort of action by the
government — subsidies, taxes, or some
sort of regulation. So a tax on ice cream
producers would cause the supply
to decrease and shift to the left. A subsidy —
if the government gave them more money
to produce more — that would shift it to
the right. And some sort of regulation, like
limiting the amount of ice cream we
could produce, would decrease the supply.
The fourth shifter of supply is number
of sellers. So if there are fewer sellers,
supply would shift to the left. If
there are more sellers, there's more supply
and it shifts to the right. And the fifth
and final shifter of supply is a change
in expectations. If producers think the
price is going to go up for ice cream in
the future, maybe they'll hold back
supply now and wait to go sell it later.
Okay, there we go — those are the five
shifters or determinants of supply,
showing you why a supply curve might
shift to the right or left. But notice
the price of ice cream is not on that
list, because price does not shift the
curve. Price moves along the curve.
Now we finally have enough to put supply
and demand together. We've got a demand
curve — now here comes the supply curve —
and we can find equilibrium. Economists
call this the market clearing price. It's
the only price where the quantity demanded
equals the quantity supplied. And if
there's a change in the price for ice
cream, that moves along the demand and
the supply curve, changing the quantity
demanded and the quantity supplied. This
is called disequilibrium. For example, the
price is down here — the quantity demanded is
greater than the quantity supplied, and
that is a shortage. At this low price,
consumers want to buy a whole lot of ice
cream, but producers don't want to
produce very much, and there is a
shortage. But if the price goes up here,
the quantity supplied increases — producers want
to produce a lot, but at the high price
consumers don't want to buy very much.
That means there's a surplus. But really,
in a free market there's no reason for
the price to stay up there. If prices are
too high, eventually producers are going to
start lowering the price and that'll put
us back at equilibrium. And if prices
were too low, then consumers would bid up
the price of those products until
eventually it reaches equilibrium. The
point is, unless the government is
involved in controlling prices, just
assume we're at equilibrium in a free
market. All right, now I'm excited. Now we
have supply and demand equilibrium — we
can start using that to find out what's
going to happen to price and quantity. Okay,
here we go. We've got demand and supply
at equilibrium. Let's say there's a study
that comes out that says ice cream makes
you smarter. How is that going to affect
the price and the quantity of ice cream?
Well, people prefer to be smart, and that
means that's going to increase the
demand, shifting it to the right. So the
price and the quantity are going to
increase. But if some study said that ice
cream actually makes you dumber, that
would decrease demand, causing the price
and the quantity to fall. But what if
instead there was some machine that
could produce ice cream quicker and
cheaper? That would increase the supply
because it's affecting production — price
would go down, quantity would go up. But
if instead we ran out of milk and the
price of milk increased, then the supply
for ice cream would decrease, price would
go up, and quantity would go down. And
that's it. It seems like a lot, but there are
really only four things that can happen:
demand can go up, demand
can go down, supply can go up, or supply
can go down. And in each case the
equilibrium price and quantity changes.
But you don't need to memorize it — just
draw the graph. When in doubt, draw it out.
Okay, that's it for supply and demand.
There are several things I didn't cover —
for example, price controls: when the
government controls the price, ceilings
and floors, or double shifts. But I have
videos that cover those concepts. And if
you're in macroeconomics, you're going to
take what you learned about supply and
demand in a market and apply it to the
entire economy when you look at
aggregate demand and aggregate supply.
And if you're in a microeconomics class,
you're going to learn about elasticity —
it looks at the shape of the supply and
the demand curve. The point here is
you've got the basics, but there's a lot
more stuff that you're going to have to
learn. And most importantly, you have to
sit down and actually practice. So don't
think just watching one video with me is
going to help you. You've got to sit down,
practice different scenarios of shifting
demand and supply. And of course, if you
need more help practicing, take a look at
my ultimate review packet. And if you're
a teacher, take a look at my economics
worksheets. Thank you so much for
watching my videos. Make sure to
subscribe. Until next time!